The Russia–Ukraine war and global trade reallocations
Highlights
The Russia–Ukraine war reduced imports from Ukraine by 47.3% until August 2022.
Ukraine lost $19.4 billion in exports, while Russia gained $68.3 billion.
Russia realized trade gains of $41.1 billion in Asia.
The war had limited trade implications for not directly involved countries.
Global market adjustments operated mainly through increased commodity prices.
This paper uses a product-level empirical model of bilateral trade to examine the global trade implications of the Russian invasion of Ukraine. The results show that imports from Ukraine were 47.3% below the counterfactual between February and August 2022. The Russia–Ukraine war led to significant trade diversion for Russia, primarily benefiting Russian mineral oil and gas exports to Europe and Asia. The analysis also reveals that the trade adjustments operate mainly through import price hikes, with notable heterogeneity across product groups and regions. The findings indicate that the Ukraine–Russia war had significant trade implications for Ukraine and Russia but only limited ones for other countries.
The Russian invasion of Ukraine has caused considerable human suffering and harmed global trade (Ruta, 2022). According to the World Trade Organization (WTO), the global economic outlook has worsened since the start of the Russia–Ukraine war on February 24, 2022, with trade growth projected to fall from 4.7% to less than 3.4% (WTO, 2022). Ukraine and Russia are major commodity exporters. Ukraine, in particular, ships most of its products by sea, and the conflict has greatly limited this mode of transport. Russia, in contrast, faces substantial economic sanctions that impact the domestic economy and limits its ability to participate in global markets. Both mechanisms led to a worldwide reallocation of trade flows for commodities, such as base metals, mineral oils, and agricultural products (Borin et al., 2022, Bentley et al., 2022). This paper provides the first ex-post empirical analysis of the global trade reallocation effects caused by the Russia–Ukraine war, using detailed trade data and theory-consistent empirical models to quantify the degree of trade destruction and diversion resulting from the Russian invasion of Ukraine.

A growing literature investigates the economic consequences of the Russia–Ukraine war. Studies have examined a range of topics, including economic growth (Mahlstein et al., 2022), stock market performance (Boungou and Yatié, 2022), commodity markets (Fang and Shao, 2022), and food security (Behnassi and El Haiba, 2022, Carriquiry et al., 2022). Borin et al. (2022) developed a theoretical model to show that the extent of the economic effects depends on the ability of a country to diversify its supply chains. Ruta (2022) conducted an ex-ante simulation that predicts global trade to decrease by 1% in 2022, reducing the global gross domestic product by 0.7%. Other ex-ante studies have simulated the implications of economic sanctions on trade (Allen, 2022, Estrada and Koutronas, 2022), analyzed pre-war grain market trade dependencies (Glauben et al., 2022), and explored measures to ensure food security (Bentley et al., 2022). In an ex-post analysis for grain and oilseed trade, Ahn et al. (2023) find that imports from Ukraine were 78.2% lower between February and July 2022. They show that the Ukraine–Russia war had substantial trade implications for the directly involved countries but only limited ones for global grain and oilseed markets.

The paper utilizes a product-level empirical model of bilateral trade to assess the ex-post trade effects of the Russian invasion of Ukraine. Drawing on recent contributions to the international trade and policy literature (Arita et al., 2022, Steinbach, 2022, Ahn et al., 2023), a counterfactual identification strategy is used that measures the trade destruction and diversion effects at the product and region levels. The estimates reveal that imports from Ukraine were 47.3% or $19.4 billion below the counterfactual level between February and August 2022. Reduced exports of agricultural commodities and base metals drive those trade losses. In contrast, Russia recorded trade grains that pushed imports 15.7% above the counterfactual. Higher mineral exports, which increased by more than $61.2 billion between February and August 2022, drove the trade gains. Russia realized those trade gains mainly with Asia, which imported more than $41.1 billion of additional products. There is further evidence of trade diversion with countries other than Russia and Ukraine, particularly in South America, North America, Europe, and Africa, being most pronounced for agricultural commodities and mineral products. The findings suggest that the Ukraine–Russia war had significant trade implications for the directly involved countries but only limited ones for the global markets. Lastly, the empirical results prove that global market adjustments operated mainly through increased commodity prices.

The paper makes two distinct contributions to the growing literature on the economic consequences of the Russian invasion of Ukraine. Firstly, it is the first study to utilize counterfactual statistical methods to quantify the direct and indirect impacts of the Russia–Ukraine war on international trade. These findings extend previous ex-ante studies on the trade effects of economic sanctions and trade blockages and ex-post studies on the product-specific trade effects (Allen, 2022, Estrada and Koutronas, 2022, Ahn et al., 2023). Secondly, the paper documents the global reallocation dynamics for different product groups and regions. It shows how the trade effects of the Russia–Ukraine war operate primarily through import price adjustments. These insights are essential, as earlier ex-ante simulation studies have warned of supply constraints and their implications for global markets (Bentley et al., 2022, Glauben et al., 2022, Ruta, 2022).